I mean that's the pragmatic advice I
often give to to my mentees who are like
when they describe to their situation
hey how do I how do I level up and when
I hear the rest of their context it
almost immediately jumps out as no I
don't think you have a hope here for
today's hello interview I'm really
excited to introduce rendra uh rendra is
the head of Applied AI at data bricks
he's also worked at meta as a director
responsible for video recommendations
and then as a senior staff engineer at
Google so really excited to have you on
the channel rendra thank you for having
me I guess um let's jump into some some
high level discussion you've been in the
industry for for quite a while and and
seen a lot of different companies I I
think over the last say decade there's
been this very big shift I think it it
started with covid and and it leads up
to now in really The Vibes of the
industry I think some of this started
with a series of layoffs the RTO fights
that are happening in companies and just
trying to figure out what is the new
order for Tech I'd love to get your your
perspectives on this what's happening
behind the scenes especially amongst
leaders in these big companies that are
driving all these cultural changes in
general there is this the big shift has
been driven by Ai and how AI has changed
the way people work we seeing a huge
amount of quote being written by Ai and
at the same time we also seeing seeing
some amount of like postco sort of drop
in engagement among new employees so if
you take those two like okay on one hand
you have a bunch of AI assistant that
everyone has access to which makes their
coding faster cleaner better and all of
that on the other hand employees feel
less engaged because they're not meeting
people face to face specifically postco
so I think like those two the biggest
forces like where are you going to be
working out of and what kind of
technological help are you going to get
when you're building software so in in
some sense what's happening is the
easier stuff is going to keep getting
served by Ai and the harder stuff that
requires inperson collaborations and all
of that might be the main reason why we
have human software Engineers rather
than machines doing everything because
there's a lot of incredible amount of
subjectivity in what we build how we
build it and so AI is not at that level
like if in some sort of hierarchy of
increasingly complex AI problems the AI
of today is still very much following
instructions tell me what you need and
I'll do it it's not actually creating
those instructions on its own sufficient
amount of time to really replace humans
human actions that are sort of at that
higher level of like what should we
build how should we you know prioritize
a versus B what is our next strategy for
the next 6 12 18 months so if you just
take that all together we are in a world
where there's this opposing forces of
use more AI but also have more human
interaction so it's a somewhat
polarizing right like on one hand you're
saying okay you have like an assistant
that does everything for you but then
the problem is like if that is doing
more and more of that like your value
proposition as an engineer in Tech is to
like figure out what is it that you want
to do and for that being in isolation is
harder and I'm not saying in I'm not I'm
not sure about this inperson
versus um you know physically in person
versus virtually in person I'm not
particularly I don't have a strong
opinion on that okay but I do think that
Engineers that communicate better and
collaborate better with others are going
to be able to ask those right questions
better and that's something that you
can't do by sitting in isolation and
doing things because value that you
bring by just figuring out
the difficult coding aspects of what you
do is no longer such a big value prop
because you can always like get a
machine to do that for you does that
make sense yeah I think it does you feel
like a lot of this is actually driven by
really the response to gbd3 in in some
respects because I I guess another
interpretation that I've heard floating
around is that all of these companies
were just waiting for this moment where
they'd be able to push on efficiency and
kind of pull back some of the benefits
that you know software Engineers have
enjoyed over the last decade and then
you know this uh economic uh weakness
they just given them an opportunity but
you're saying actually no the job of
software Engineers is changing in part
from technology and you know this is
this this shift that we're seeing inside
bigger companies is largely a response
to that is that correct I I I mean my
feeling is that software Engineers are
all going to level up
I mean that's the expectation I mean
what does it what does it mean to level
up it means that you know the very
lowlevel things that you Ed to get paid
for is going to be done by machines and
so you you have to level up at the same
you have to effectively level up in that
sort of in one semantic or two semantic
layers above where you used to sit at
the same level of job like job level
like you know um that's kind of what I'm
trying to say like I think is it reduc
ring employability I'm not sure I I I
think it's definitely reducing it's
going to eventually reduce the number of
jobs at the low level but I think there
are many competing forces that will
decide the total market right so it's
like the efficiency with which people
can like software Engineers can build
software competes with the increasing
like number of different problems that
need to be solved with some software
sure and it's very difficult to imagine
that this is not going to have an impact
on this profession you you said level up
there and I I think there's a lot of
interpretations and you sound like
you're in a really good position to at
least forecast for us about what this
means I think one interpretation of
leveling up is like along the
traditional career axes and in a lot of
companies that means becoming an
architect and being responsible for
bigger decisions or aligning teams I
think this could also mean you know
taking on more like product style
responsibilities where you're instead
more respons responsible for shaping the
direction of the business or the product
when you say level up in this context
what did you have in mind I'm actually
talking about the latter where you are
going to be much more responsible for
the higher level purpose of the software
you're building I don't know actually
the economics of like basically at the
same level professional level or salary
level whatever you call that people will
expect your your the leadership in these
companies would expect more from you as
it pertains to understanding the
software that you're building and being
much more aware of like the implications
of changing the software a certain way
or building new features because the
just writing simple code that would just
make something happen is just not going
to be a thing that they'll hire people
at your level for so what are you going
to be valuable for you're going to be
valuable for deciding the next level of
um at the next level of whatever you
call it complexity or SE like next SE
next higher semantic layer of how you
see the software right okay what is this
for who is the user like people will
like engineers at the same level as they
were like five years back are now going
to have to understand the life cycle of
that software the critical user journeys
of the software much more than they used
to because why else would they hire a
human for that role sure software
Engineers will have to be exploit their
humanlike characteristics more on their
job interesting like things that are
more difficult to replicate so I'm sure
your various traits and your your your
various qualities uh fall in you know in
different buckets of like how how
replaceable is this skill so like if you
look at the distribution of like easily
replaceable to much much more difficult
to replace your distribution has to
shift to the right your skill set has to
shift to the right in in in that sense
right so you should spend less time
doing things that machines can easily do
in the future and more time more time
honing the skills that you know machines
have very little chance of or or or or
skills that other people don't trust
machines to be able to do like it's not
even clear if humans are better at
judging Aesthetics of photograph it's
just the other humans around them don't
trust machines with certain tasks
definitely um yeah I think there that's
a subtle that's a subtle difference a
ton of I I I like the the emphasis here
but I guess in my mind this also kind of
aligns with classical career advice that
many Engineers have received which is to
say you know your hands on keyboard sort
of code writing um will certainly get
you pretty far in your career but at a
certain point you need to start to
figure out how to influence be a part of
the business decide on larger Direction
design larger systems so I think in some
sense most Engineers are kind of primed
for graduating on these semantic layers
that you've talked about but many
struggle with that and I I love some of
the writing that you have on LinkedIn
you've got a lot of hot takes about
management and about leadership what
advice might you give our audience who
is sitting in a position where they feel
like they could be doing those things
but either their leadership isn't giving
them the opportunity or they feel
somehow hobbled by the organization this
is a very tactical advice but the one
that really resonates with me is
communication skills and uh like how
well you
communicate gives your leadership the
impression that you can think even
though between all else being equal
someone who communicates better is
usually given those higher level tasks
is what I've seen people judge other
people B literally and they don't have
enough time to evaluate others so then
they evaluate them based on the few
sentences that exchange that they
exchange with them oh this guy seems
really good or this girl seems really
insightful like that's it like based on
like 10 sentences that they exchange
like immediately people pass judgment
and especially leadership part of
leadership's job is to judge whether we
like it or not that's the job like or
constantly evaluating who's good who's
who can do this task who can lead this
area who can sort of communicate to the
CEO who can you know uh you know part
build Partnerships between teams who can
resolve conflicts like constantly that's
what we're doing so if you want like
those are all higher level tasks than
sitting in a corner writing code for a
well-defined problem right so I would
say like working on your communication
skills not just this is not just pure
English or or whatever language you
speak but it's about like what do you
speak about and with how much clarity
and Conference can you speak about that
is a very tactical way to sort of level
up in my opinion again this level up is
more around the level up that we just
talked about right not just getting
promoted although that could be an
outcome of this but the main thing is
like instead of telling you can you can
you write this code or can you fix this
bug to can you take charge of this area
can you tell us what we should do here
that's the level up I'm talking about
like going from less like Concrete
technical tasks to like more abstract
higher level uh missions right so if
yeah if that makes sense I think it does
yeah and the emphasis on communication
is is really uh kind of tractable at
least for most the communication is
necessary but has to be preceded by deep
thinking around products because you
can't communicate meaningfully
especially especially the highly
perceptive leaders around you they'll
judge the M the content that you're
talking about and like what what kind of
surprising elements are you bringing to
the table that means that you can bring
a fresh perspective that even they don't
that leader doesn't have so so not only
do you want to communicate well but you
should precede that by studying the
problems that you're going to talk about
in a level of depth that you sort of
haven't planned on before or haven't
done before like I love to think in
terms of like okay here is a problem
I'll think deeply about it and when I
think when I feel like I have thought
deeply enough enough about it I'll I'll
go deeper it's like going down a mine
and then seeing if there's another hole
that you can go down further that's I
like that analogy it sounds like
becoming an expert and communicating
well are are kind of two of the the
Tactical pieces some of what you've been
saying is has been really about this
shift in the style of work but I think
for a lot of Engineers they originally
get into software engineering in
particular because they're fascinated by
the technical challenges and there's no
doubt going to be technical challenges
in the Horizon of increasing difficulty
what would you say for an engineer who
really wants to stay in that zone how do
they continue to level up and be more
effective especially in light of the
advances in AI is it that they've got to
find a company that's working on these
kind of Frontier problems or is it that
they need to change their approach where
they're at I mean honestly let's be
really honest there are going to be
companies where the only way to level up
is to like do a few things like manage
people or you know do all this kind of
like presenting to senior leaders so
there's a narrow way of like leveling up
in in terms of levels and all that so
definitely in some cases if you're in a
company that's somewhat like traditional
with how they grow people you do have to
find a new job in a in a company I mean
that's the pragmatic advice I often give
to to my mentees who are like when they
describe to their situation hey how do I
how do I level up and when I hear the
rest of their context it almost
immediately jumps out as no I don't
think you have a hope here the kind of
work you want to do the kind of deep
technical work you you want to do and
continue to do is not going to be
appreciated at this company that you're
at so your only bet is the only
pragmatic thing to do at that point is
to like find another employer who would
respect that the depth in put another
way there are jobs where the depth is
appreciated there are jobs where that
depth is like you you FL flatten out
some level of depth in in terms of
technical uh tech technical Excellence
or technical depth or technical
complexity but if you are at a company
where increasingly complex problems
exist and you are not really solving
those problems you have to find a way to
get there to take on bigger and bigger
challenges and how you do it is again
I'll go back to my old friend
communication so you do have to
communicate to some extent that you can
lead increasingly complex problems so
that people can trust you with those
problems and you you have to assume good
good faith effort on the behalf of your
leadership to find the right problem for
you based on what they know so you have
to make them know more about you by
telling by by showing them that you're
capable of doing more than what you're
doing now through various I mean again
it's doesn't have to be verbal
communication you can also write
increasingly complex design documents
about the work you're doing that shows
your level of depth in your thinking so
that somebody can bet on you for the
next level of comp complex work so Step
One is make sure you're at a company
where the dep depth complexity all of
that is appreciated and second is once
you're there or once you've made sure
that you're there make sure that you're
also like you can be UST you're giving
enough signals that you can be entrusted
to solve increasingly more complex
technical problems and by the way it's
not always going to be purely technical
problems some of this is also going to
be um people some combination of
Technical and people problems because
almost I've never seen a case of
increasingly more complex problems where
people people problems did not emerge it
happens everywhere whenever you're
you're solving increasingly more
interesting problems that your top
leadership cares about there will be
hungry like hungry wolves there'll be
folks like you know looking to have a
piece of it right and so there you'll
deal with that complexity you to find
know smart ways of sort of dividing and
conquering or finding your n or
something like that but there's
definitely it's there's almost at least
in software maybe in certain very
technical areas of software or or or
Hardware that you can just do
increasingly harder things in complete
isolation of the people around you but I
I fail to believe that complexity that
is necess to to level up in
software does not involve people it's if
you're if you're constantly uh asking
help from a manager or a colleague or
something to to help you solve you'll
you'll you'll sort of Plato at some
level because they'll be like okay this
person needs uh babysitting around
harder problems that's not something
that they'll they'll be this is a this
is a blocker for your career growth the
people aspect you can't you can't can't
remove entirely from the picture and it
it seems like the the advice for you is
if you're in a company where you're just
not getting that technical opportunity
that it's probably an imperative that
you go find that position because the
the the C is rising and then for those
that are in a reasonable position but
maybe not getting that work then you
come back to this idea about
communication kind of finding
sponsorship and figuring out how you can
start to work on those problems yes yes
and you and you sort of of and you
people are like the thing I find people
surprised by is the amount of people
problem they have to deal with as they
go up a lot of time people just say I'm
not going to grow Beyond this level
because I don't want to deal with that
so that's your choice if you have to
like always rely on just increasingly
more technical complex problems to in
order to grow in your career there will
be a time when you'll be at a Crossroads
about whether you want to take on that
like because you know it's a zero sum
game like one overly simplistic thing I
like to think about is when you're
solving infinitely interesting problems
you'll get zero pay and if you're if
you're solving in extremely terrible
problems you'll get like the like
infinite amount of money so like we all
stradling that sort of that those two
extremes like we're moving like left and
right of it because because that
interesting I'm assuming is correlated
with like
demand uh sorry Supply supply of talent
who be willing to do this like for
example AI jobs like the number one
thing people tell me is like oh I want
to get an AI job but I'm training a
model that's the number one thing I love
to write the pie torch code I must be
writing the pie torch code I love to do
that yes you have to be if you don't do
that it's not real machine learning so
the demand for that is so high that they
can easily find someone who will just do
it for cheap but and you you almost
think like it's the opposite but like
people who can train a model following
some instruction versus people who can
fundamentally innovate modeling through
deep expertise is very different so the
pay pay band there would be very wide
but just wanting to train a model people
will work for Less because they get to
do it so it's it's a I I think it's
quite flawed what I just said but it's
an interesting yeah it's a it's a model
I I guess I think I've always seen it
most acutely in the games industry where
you know everybody wants to become a
game developer a lot of people do and as
a result the working conditions
generally aren't that good I think most
game industry veterans would would agree
with that not good yeah you've you've
kind of U painted a picture though it
sounds like there's some urgency for
people to be just gradually elevating
you know the the level that they're
operating at and in some respects that
people might be mispositioned that where
they are now is not going to take them
there that means that a lot of people
are theoretically looking for a shift
they're either looking to move into more
technical roles or maybe up that that
semantic pyramid that you talked about
what in your mind is kind of the key for
people in making that transition a lot
of education is going to be involved and
that I'm not I don't mean formal
education like learning learning to do
new things that You' have not done
before being in a very uncomfortable
position for some time till you become
comfortable using that skill to
interview well at these companies where
interesting work is happening in that
space or even like showing in your
current company that you can do new
things that the company is not working
on because this is a very sort of we are
all learning like especially in this AI
space we are all learning every day
there a very sort of learning oriented
those who are just finding new insights
and are willing to experiment with
whatever they get their hands on are uh
being sought out because most people
there's not a lot of theoretical basis
for what we are seeing out there so it's
not like there's a very welldefined book
that can be written about like all the
things we are learning but lots of
anecdotes are emerging and we are sort
of figuring out like how much of these
anecdotes can be generalized into
something theoretical or is is it that
like there's a bunch of folks who are
just going to keep trying different
things and those who are able to try
more things are more likely to chance
upon something great and so then you
start seeking out people who have have
the tenacity to learn something and then
apply it over and over again till you
see something good and so you don't need
any formal education for that you just
need perseverance you need a willingness
to learn you need a growth mindset and
you just keep doing it over and over
again one of the higher level things you
can do in AI today is quality which
means no matter what kind of AI problem
you're solving the initial version of
this is going to be shipped so you're
going to your job is going to be to make
it better right so and this is a kind of
thing a lot of people tell me I don't
want to do that I don't want to keep
trying and figuring out but definitely
one way to like level up in a somewhat
narrow way is to be an expert at just
trying failing trying succeeding that
Loop of like trying succeeding or
failing and based on that deciding to
sort of merge that change into your
system and then trying again and failing
and like going through that Loop over
and over again till over some period of
time you've made a product that was kind
of me to something that's really useful
and so the difference for any given AI
product is between how many is is like
how many different
like like people were asked to do that
for a single product over what period of
time and you've seen that kind of
success at Google at at at facebook/
meta we seeing that at like companies
like Netflix over the years you know
where you just keep getting better and
better at like you know quality of AI
systems right and that's somewhat narrow
but like it just came to me because it's
like something that neither requires too
much specialization nor requires like
being in the right place at the right
time you can just be the you can just be
that person because you're going to be
in the minority of people who would want
to do that I like the emphasis on kind
of grit and tenacity as well I think
those are two qualities that over the
long run end up really separating out
people who are successful from those who
are I think that grit and tenacity is
like very applicable to scientific
discovery in general and this is a we
are in that phase where we don't really
understand what we are obser we like all
literally observing emergent behavior in
in in neural networks and we're trying
to like there there's there's not you're
not going to have an aha moment here in
most cases you're going to just keep
iterating and finding new new local
Optima it's a very interesting idea to
say we're kind of entering into a newly
scientific age for engineering where we
have to be more Curious yeah because
it's too complex for any kind of
theoretical basis uh Rend I've got one
last question I know we're almost out of
time you you have this very contrarian
take that I actually love a lot that
really emphasizes Having side projects
and hobbies and not being overly focused
on work and you feel that this is
actually a way to kind of in some sense
get ahead even in the work itself I'd
love to hear a little bit about why you
came to that conclusion I know you have
a lot of really interesting hobbies that
we could get into and probably won't
have time but tell me why you think this
is so powerful I think like the big big
big thing is like me mental health I
mean to me that's the number one reason
I have so much so many hobbies because
if I don't have a good day at work I can
go back and do something else with my
art if I don't have a good day in art I
can come back to work and find some
value because ultimately we are all
pursuing feeling valued all the time
I've distilled that it down to just that
like after talking to hundreds of people
by the way I have lots of men mentees
and that's a completely new thing that
happened this year when I like started
talking to like 170 different St
strangers about their problems and I
found out that this is the number one
thing that at this is a bias set of
people who decide to you know choose me
as a me the the thing that emerges from
that those conversations is that
everyone is looking to feel valued
that's it basically if you then take a
step back feeling valued can should need
not just come from your work it need not
come from your family it could also come
from something else in fact with with
work and family it feels somewhat like
uh you're expected to do a certain
things whereas with with Hobbies one of
the things that happens with even little
effort you you get a lot of validation
for what you do because people don't
expect that to be your profession I I
like that I guess the the key here is
that for people to have any sort of
intensity at work they need to have in
some cases an outlet where if they fail
it's not the end of the world you've got
other things going on and I would say
like two two more things the outlet a
lot of people say oh I I also play the
guitar but the problem with that is yes
you frustrated you play the guitar at
some point of time if you're truly
depressed at work you'll stop playing
your guitar so it has to be more than
that it has to be something where you
are accountable for delivering something
and you are evaluated on it in some
sense without too much pressure right in
my case like I'm I'm I'm I'm running a
theater production right I have to
deliver it on by a certain date and
people will come and watch it and give
me their feedback and if it works well
you you you sort of like get a great
feeling it's a warm fuzzy feeling when
that happens but if it doesn't work well
it's not the end of the world because
this is not your day job so you can sort
of go back you can improve you can learn
from those mistakes and you can go back
and to the drawing board and do it again
better this time and you keep getting
better and better render this is a great
way to round out our discussion I love
the the ideas that you brought to the
table from kind of how to be effective
in in kind of this new world the newly
scientific economy how to progress your
career but also how to round out as an
individual and make sure that you don't
burn out this has been super informative
really appreciate the time